Server-side programmers should support their software themselves
================================================================
Andrei Gudkov <gudokk@gmail.com>
:figure-caption!:

Suppose that you have a special guy whose job is to press U key.
U key is located inside the Plexiglas cage with a lock, so that only this guy is able to use it.
Each time when you need to press U key, you raise new ticket in a bugtracker and, after about an hour,
this special guy comes, unlocks the cage and presses the key.
That is, you are allowed to press any other keys, but not U.
What's so special about U, would you ask?
Absolutely nothing.
There is just an old tradition in the industry to limit access to U key.
Everybody does this, and so do we.


The guy who presses U key is considered to be very important.
Indeed, he receives high salary for his job and has a certificate stating that he is an expert in pressing U keys.
Furthermore, it took nearly a year to find such a brilliant person!
All other candidates performed poorly on our standard test, and only this guy managed to answer the question
"in what row is U key located?" without looking at the keyboard.
So, you all must be really grateful to him.
And don't even try to say that you would be able to press U key on your own if you were given a chance.


What are you going to do in such situation?
Actually, there are not many options you have.
Straightforward approach is to pause work for an hour awaiting this guy each time when you need to press U key.
During this period of time, you may have a cup of coffee, play billiards, read Reddit or just meditate
by looking at an empty wall.
As you understand, this is not the type of activity that will bring you the joy of success.
Alternatively, you may attempt to switch to another task.
But as soon as you are about to complete immersion in it, this guy arrives, interrupts you and
you have to switch back to the original task.
As such, this option doesn't advance your work in any meaningful way, either.
If you have at least a bit of motivation, then eventually you will come up with the only one truly working solution --
to resist stupid rules at all costs.


First, you will complain about inefficiency to every person in charge: "Are you sure that spending 90% of time
on waiting for this U guy is OK?
I am assigned on a task to write a text with more than one hundred U-s in it till next weekend.
How exactly am I supposed to meet deadline within such constraints?"
Finally, realizing that everybody has accepted such process as normal long time ago, you will
start thinking of some sort of workaround that will remove dependency from this ugly U guy
(who, by the way, is not guilty of the current situation and is in no better position than you).
What can you do?
First idea is to reduce using U key to bare minimum.
Luckily, human brain is very flexible: if you remove intra-word occurrences of U, then it won't affect readability too much.
Good.
Now you need to smmon this gy only twice per day.
For a brief moment, you celebrate yor personal victory over the stpidity and ignorance.
Bt very soon you realize that this is not enogh, you need to think of some better soltion.
So, after spending a weekend of hard thinking, you come up with the idea of replacing remaining occrences of U with OO.
Perfect!
Of corse, the qality of yor work becomes even worse, bt at least yooo are able to complete it
in a reasonable amont of time.
Now yooo are completely independent from this OO gy and eventally yooo forget how he looks like.


Even if at some point later you decide to follow the correct procedures and request this guy,
then it won't work out as before.
Months of being useless made this guy depressed and lazy.
He starts acting like a spoiled little child, who produces never-ending list of wishes,
but fulfilling them doesn't satisfy him.
First, he will demand time to drink his usual morning caffè latte,
then he will spend one hour reading irrelevant e-mails and watching funny Youtube videos,
then a break time comes followed by the training courses, then there is a lunch, and then...
well, then MAYBE he will be in the mood to perform his duties.
"But wait. Can't you wait until next Monday? It is better to do such type of work when it is sunny outside, you know."
And without having direct control over this guy, you can't force him to do his job.
The result is the unbridgeable chasm between you and this guy, who was supposed to help you.
Replacing and omitting U, which started as a fast and dirty workaround, becomes a weird de facto norm.


Who benefits from such situation?
Nobody, except maybe the lowest level manager, whose only goal is to hire as many people as possible
in order to secure political position and boost self-esteem.
You are screwed because using not fit to purpose approaches wastes your time and makes you inefficient.
U key presser is screwed because being entirely disconnected from the production chain guarantees
depressed mood and loss of skill.
Stakeholders are screwed because of excessive expenses, not to mention that if you leave,
then it will be a long time until your replacement will get accustomed to "norms" you had to create,
which may disrupt all the plans.


Sounds familiar?
I believe yes.
There are a lot of cases when artificially inserted barrier cripples productivity.
In this article, I would like to focus attention on the stupidity of inserting a 
system administrator between programmers and instances of their software in server-side projects.
Interaction between programmers and "U key pressers" aka sysadmins followed the above scenario
in all projects I participated in or observed.
Every simple ad-hoc action of making a release, tuning system configuration or resolving an issue in a live system
takes ages of chasing sysadmins, who avoid their duties at all costs.
In addition, all non-critical bugs and incidents have high chance of being ignored.
It would be distressing to spend hours in talks with sysadmins when you are sure that the problem can
be investigated and solved in a matter of minutes by yourself if you had corresponding access privileges.
Programmers are supposed to write code and not to spend all their time on chasing or nursing sysadmins:
this is not something programmers are trained for and not something programmers are fond of.


Interested in success of their product, programmers have to invent various workarounds to reduce dependence on sysamdins.
Non-exhaustive list of them includes:

  - ordering ten times more hardware in advance than required
  - creating comprehensive monitoring interfaces to exposure logs and system state, 
    because only sysadmins have access to conventional tools
  - using off-site hardware for development purposes,
    often purchased with out-of-pocket money
  - using production environment for testing and vice versa
  - and even creating command backdoors
    (of course, officially such thing would be innocently named something like "Master Control Program")


Above workarounds act like a silent agreement between programmers and sysadmins.
Using them allows for both groups to achieve their goals, albeit inefficiently for overall development process.
Programmers can now perform their duties without being blocked 90% of the time,
while sysadmins enjoy their comfortable position of not taking any responsibility
and not being constantly bothered by routine tasks.


To be honest, the very idea of delegating support of in-house developed software to sysadmins is absurd.
There is an abyss between off the shelf software and in-house software.
Off the shelf software is mature, is rarely released, and there is typically a huge community built around it:
documentation, forums, blogs, training sessions, consultants, public events.
A great deal was invested to make it detachable from the people who had created it.
In-house software, on the other hand, is the exact opposite of it.
It changes very quickly -- this is exactly the job programmers are hired for.
It would be impossible to follow all the changes without being located in the whirlpool of the development process.
In-house software is also error-prone in a sense that latest features are simply not tested by time yet.
Alas, there is no testing method that would detect all bugs.
Some of them emerge only in production environment and only after some time after the release.
If an error occurs, sysadmins won't be able to solve it by themselves.
The best thing they can do is to restart the program,
and if it doesn't help, the next step would be to phone the responsible programmer.
All handbooks are eventually reduced to a pair of these two simple steps.
Managers and too naïve to see the difference between out of the shelf software and in-house software,
their motto is "if it is installed on the server, then it is supportable by sysadmins".
Sysadmins are too timid to firmly reject this idea.
They commit to support in-house software -- the promise they are not able to fulfill in practice.
They become afraid of any modifications as the result
and start acting as an unnecessary obstacle between programmers and their software.

image::offtheshelf-vs-inhouse.png[width=60%,align=center]

In server-side projects, sysadmins are assumed by default to be an annoying nuisance with no real help to the project
when it comes to supporting in-house software.
Primary goal of programmers is to add new features by means of releases, goal of sysadmins is to ensure that nothing breaks.
Sysadmins figured out that the best way to do this is to avoid modifications at all costs:
the best hardware is powered off hardware.
And because they are usually a part of an entirely different organizational hierarchy,
there is no way to force them change their minds.
They are completely uncontrollable.


Problem is particularly ridiculous when it happens to fresh projects.
While it is natural to find numerous limitations in large mature projects where it is all about politics,
job security and covering your ass, there is simply no justification for them in yet to be grown projects.
You do not have a working product yet, but you've already managed to create inefficiency.
By doing so you act like a little child who copies bad habits of his parents, thinking that it will somehow
make him grow faster.
Do not copy bad patterns.


I assert that the traditional way of dividing responsibilities between a programmer and sysadmin is totally wrong.
It never works in practice, but companies continue to copy it again and again.
Any attempt to insert sysadmin on the path between programmers and their software leads to the
degradation of quality and development speed without bringing any benefits.
Sysadmin's role should be to provide platform consisting of off the shelf hardware and software.
Support of in-house software is beyond the abilities of a sysadmin and should be done by the programmers instead.
This is the correct and natural split point.


It is not clear why this approach is still not widely used.
Computer industry produced an impressive toolset intended to elegantly split programmers and sysadmins:
containers, virtualization, DMZ, VLAN, firewalls, audit and backup tools.
All you need to do is to split hardware assets into isolated security domains,
ensure that you have automatic backup, setup audit system,
and now you can grant programmers with full access rights.
Let them do all the subsequent work themselves.
Such approach makes programmers and sysadmins to organically complement, rather than blame, one another.
The consequence is that all following tasks, which are typically done only after days of chasing sysadmins
or by means of nasty workarounds, now can be completed on demand directly by the programmers:

  * performing releases
  * debugging running programs
  * installing packages from approved repository
  * managing open ports between servers and workstations
  * retrieving configuration files of servers and switches
  * monitoring servers and switches, subscribing to alerts
  * using kernel tools: cache control, swap control, kernel debugging interface
  * tuning system settings: limits, performance parameters of disks and NICs

Audit provides alerts about who and when makes system change in violation against corporate rules.
Backup makes you confident that system may be restored very fast if something goes wrong.
And security domains limit damage from very pessimistic scenarios.


Consequences of such approach:

 * higher transparency: no need for nasty workarounds anymore
 * higher development speed: programmers are not blocked by sysadmins
 * higher quality: non-critical bugs are not ignored anymore
 * higher morale: sysadmins are not scapegoats anymore when something goes wrong


In software design, it is considered a good practice to strive for loose coupling between components.
Then why don't you do the same thing with people?


Comments
--------

disqus::srvsup[]

